---
layout: post
title: Toward a Grammar of Computer Science
---
My wife and I have chosen to classically educate our children at home.
They are currently 4, 6, and 8 years old, putting them right in the center
of the grammar stage of the trivium. The grammar stage emphasizes memorization of
concepts that will be fleshed out in the later dialectic and rhetorical
stages. We have all been thoroughly enjoying the experience, and our
boys have been soaking in facts from history, science, and mathematics,
among other topics.

Separately, my oldest son began to take an interest in computer programming.
We have tried several methods for bringing him into this fascinating endeavor,
which just happens to be my vocation. We have sent him to LEGO robotics camp,
let him play with the wonderful Scratch app, dabbled in Minecraft programming,
and helped him through some programming lessons on Khan Academy.
He also helped me design a game that we ended up publishing to the App
Store (it's called Charge It Up if you're interested).
All of these were beneficial, but he still found himself frustrated that he
was not really accomplishing anything. He wanted to build a game as good as
Minecraft, but was upset when all we could come up with after a day of
working together was a rotating 3D cube.

About a week ago, I finally began to connect the dots between these separate
experiences with classical education and programming. He loved learning the
classical way since it was tuned to his natural tendency to want to memorize
and recite all sorts of new facts at his age, but I wasn't applying this to his
programming education. Why not teach him the grammar of computer science?
The idea is to have him memorize a set of facts which set the stage for
understanding and experimenting (dialectic) then creating and teaching
(rhetoric) in later middle school and high school years.
I could not find a good resource online for a classical grammar for computer
science. It is unfortunate that the term "grammar" is also used heavily
for other reasons in computer science, so this topic is hard to google.

Hence this site.

The terms I am collecting come mainly from my memories of mid-90s to mid-2000s
college education, mixed with some later knowledge and an obvious bent
toward what seems practical to my current realms of work in my current position.
I'm finding the first sentence in Wikipedia articles are a great initial source
of information, though I have been working to keep terminology consistent.
Also note that the wording should be concise, using simpler words whenever
possible, but using more difficult words when needed for exactness or
brevity. The aim is to give very accurate definitions that may not be
fully understood until later stages of learning.

While some may see STEM and classical education at the opposite ends of the
educational spectrum, I believe there is a place for an experiment like this.

This is all on GitHub with an open license, so feel free to use, extend, etc.
to your heart's content.

If you feel like contributing, or have a suggestion for the site, ping me at
[@jeffbaumes](https://twitter.com/jeffbaumes) on Twitter,
or head to the [GitHub issues page](https://github.com/jeffbaumes/grammarofcs/issues)
and open a new issue to start a discussion. Pull requests are also welcome.

I hope to post updates on the progression of fact collection
and my sons' memorization of the facts on this site.
